---
created: 2023-02-14T15:15:53-08:00
updated: 2023-02-14T15:15:53-08:00
---

After the death of Socrates and the breakup of Greek culture that resulted from the Peloponnesian war, Socratic philosophy went into decline and fragmented into several pieces, and the fragments of Socratic philosophy make up the body of Hellenistic philosophy. What I mean by Hellenistic philosophy is the subsequent developments from Greek philosophy which take their cues from the Socratic approach to philosophy. Yet, they don't have all the component parts of the Socratic philosophy. They usually lack the wit, and they almost always lack poetry. Occasionally, they absorb some of the ethical doctrines, the epistemological doctrines. But the ones who come after Socrates never really live up to the Socratic ideal. 

 The three main fragments Socratic philosophy breaks into are called Stoicism, Epicureanism, and Skepticism, and these are the most important Hellenistic outgrowths from Socratic philosophy. And since Rome, the Roman empire in particular, is the political entity that ultimately dominates the Mediterranean Basin and absorbs and inherits the tradition of Greek philosophy, most of the Hellenistic branches of philosophy are developed in connection or reference to either politically or intellectually with Roman culture. 

The first of these developments is Hedonism or Epicureanism, named after Epicurus. What Epicureanism says is that pleasure is the only good and that a happy man is the one who has many pleasures but no corresponding pains. Indeed, there is potentially a way of deriving that from Socratic philosophy. If you would take the idea of Socratic prudence - the man who drinks a little bit in order to get a certain degree of pleasure but not so much as he will cause himself a hangover or some sort of corresponding pain - he's being prudently Socratic, picking and choosing his pleasures in such a way that he does not generate any corresponding pain. You can see possibly how people who are not entirely committed to the Socratic conception of the soul and the virtue might want to derive that sort of justification for the pursuit of pleasure from the Socratic dialogues. 

The second alternative - again a minor alternative, a fragment of Socratic philosophy - called Skepticism. Socrates throughout most of the dialogues (I hesitate I would emphasize the word *most* rather than all) says that he doesn't know anything. Part of the Socratic irony is this posture of acting as if he's really an ignorant man when in fact he is wise, and saying that he knows nothing and, thus, never trying to teach people by directly making declarative sentences. For the most part, Socrates teaches by question and answer. Socrates helped people to articulate and to realize what's already buried within their souls. When Socrates does that, when he's in that skeptical mode, he says: "I myself know nothing. All I do is inquire into things. I'm the internal inquirer - I'm the patron saint of rational inquiry." It's possible to see particularly within the context of the Roman Empire how skepticism might develop from that Socratic stance of knowing nothing. Remember that the Roman Empire is the heterogeneous mix of peoples, and cultures, and religions, and philosophical positions, and after being forced to encounter once cosmogonic myth after another, one theory of religion after another, one theory of morals after another, sophisticated Romans, sophisticated Hellenistic thinkers might well come to the conclusion that... no one really knows the right path. No one even knows if there is a right path. The best we can do is recognize that the pretensions made by the various schools of philosophy are just that - pretensions. Skepticism, while it may be rather negative, is at least right. We can be certain about what we do not know. And it's possible to see someone, especially someone that was terribly frustrated with the attempt to obtain final, absolute knowledge, might resort to Skepticism as an easy way out, a way of avoiding the burden of Socratic inquiry. 

The third and the most important development of Hellenistic philosophy is called Stoicism, and Stoicism is, probably, the greatest and most interesting of the Hellenistic philosophies. And while it never achieves the poetic and intellectual grandeur of the Socratic synthesis, of the Platonic overarching system which makes statements about the entire human condition, Stoicism is, in fact, a noble philosophy, an excellent philosophy for the silver man, for the spirited man in the republic who are going to be our guardians. It's an excellent philosophy for the military man. It's an excellent philosophy for people who are going to be practical politicians if they intend to be virtuous or if they intend to pursue the public good. Stoicism is characterized by a rejection of pleasure as a standard of human happiness and human felicity. Stoicism takes the position that the wise man, the good man, the philosopher, is a man who lives in accordance with nature. He fears only abdicating his moral responsibility. He's not afraid of pain, nor is he afraid of death, nor is he afraid of poverty - he's not afraid of any vicissitudes of the human condition. He fears only that he should let himself down, and that he should be less than a complete human being. According to the Stoics (and there are numbers of stoics, 2-3-4-5 that actually developed the doctrine, though all the doctrines are quite similar), the only matter of concern to a wise and philosophic individual is the things completely under your control. You can't control the movements of the sun and the planets. You can't control whether a leaky ship sinks or makes it to port. You can't control the weather. You can't control other people. You can't control the society around you. There's only one thing and one thing only that you're in control of and that is *you:* your will, your intentions, yourself. In other words, the wise man, the truly philosophical man is the man who is entirely in control of his own soul, who takes utter and complete moral responsibility for his actions and is indifferent to everything else. Not because he doesn't care about other people, not because he doesn't care about the felicity of the entire human species, but because it's not under his control. There's no use of wandering or worrying about what tomorrow will bring since tomorrow is not under your control. Do what's right today and let tomorrow take care of itself. The stoic philosopher is the man who has liberated himself from fear. He's not afraid of death. He's not afraid of pain. He's not afraid of other people's dismissal as a fool. The only thing he cares about is that he should meet his moral obligations. Ralph Waldo Emerson once said that **greatness is the perception that virtue is enough**, which is an elegant and beautiful line, and he might well have stolen that from the stoics because all of the stoics basically believed that virtue, the moral virtue, is an organized soul which pursues rationally the ends that are good for all human beings. That's the stoic conception of virtue. They finally understood that their greatness consists in the effect that they perceive that virtue is enough. We do not need wealth. We do not need sexual gratification. We do not need life itself. If moral virtue tells us that we must die in the pursuit of some good end - the protection of our family, the protection of our home, the protection of the innocent - in the doing of right nothing should be spared, not even our lives. The stoic, wise man is a man who has trained his soul, trained his mind so that he's not afraid of apparent evils; he's only afraid of real evil. He's afraid of losing control of his soul. He's afraid of being a slave to lust, to desire, to emotion. The stoic man is an honorable philosopher. The man who stands at his duty and is steadfast and serious-minded. In living according to nature, what the stoic philosopher does is examine the human condition and the nature of the world around us. He discerns his position in nature. He discerns the kind of creature that he is, and he lives in such a way as not to disgrace himself as not to be less than he truly could be. He won't live the swine-ish life that we found with our softness. He wants to be if not a God, certainly not less than human, he won't be an animal either. He will live to the fullest potentials that human being has to offer. 

Now, among the Roman stoics, two were especially noteworthy. One is Epictetus and another one is Marcus Aurelius. And one of the wonderful ironies about the history of philosophy is that Epictetus was a slave, and Marcus Aurelius was an emperor. The philosophy is the great equalizer: both the slave and the emperor can equally well participate in a philosophy that is accessible to all human beings as human beings. There is nothing less conscious of social status than philosophy. A wise man, a man who is disciplined, in control of his emotions and follows the way of nature can be a good man no matter what his position in the social structure is. He's not responsible for the social structure and it is not his problem - if the gods or nature or whatever is controlling the world made you a slave, then be a good slave. If the gods or nature or whatever is controlling the world made you an emperor, then be a good one. Your job is not to disgrace yourself and live to the highest potentials of a human being. 

The most interesting of the stoics is Marcus Aurelius. Lord Acton, the great English philosopher and historian, once said that *power corrupts, and absolute power corrupts absolutely*. And that's, generally speaking, true. The difficulty of that generalization is Marcus Aurelius. Marcus Aurelius was an absolute ruler. He was a ruler of the Roman Empire. He was an emperor. He had an absolute power or life and death on everyone in the known world. I don't mean in the world as we know it today but everyone in the world as the Romans would have known it (they had a very attenuated conception of the Eskimos). For them, the world is the Mediterranean Basin, and Rome owns it, and Marcus Aurelius owns Rome, essentially. His word is the law. 

 Now, almost all of the Roman emperors lived scandalous lives and disgraced themselves. They were much more concerned with indulging their sensual appetites, satisfying their passions, and flying into rages. Marcus Aurelius is the standing exception to that and the exception of Lord Acton's generalization. In his case, power didn't corrupt, and absolute power didn't corrupt absolutely. Instead, absolute power allowed us to see what the man underneath the body is really like. It allowed us to find out what Marcus Aurelius's soul is like. Imagine a man for whom all the restraints of law and custom and politics are taken away - he can have whatever he wants. If a man, under those circumstances, behaves well, you know something about the soul underneath because no external constraint is making him do what he is doing. And Marcus Aurelius is the one example of an absolute ruler who behaves in such a way as to not disgrace himself. It's an amazing temptation: imagine what it's like. Stop and put yourself in that place for a second. Marcus Aurelius takes the throne in 160 A.D. and he dies in 180 A.D. 19 years controlling the entire world. He can have all the money in the world. That's not an exaggeration - he can have **all the money in the world!** If he wants it, he can just collect it all. He can have sex with anyone he wants whenever he wants under any circumstances. If he wants to get drunk, he can have wine brought in by a boatload infinitely, forever. He can go on a drunk now and stay drunk for the next 19 years until he dies. Imagine anything that your brain desires and the emotional, irrational parts of your soul want, and now imagine that you can have it. Now, under those circumstances, imagine that you're forced to bear with that human condition for 19 years! 

Stop and think about it for a minute. How many of you would fail to disgrace yourself? to tell you the truth, I don't think that I could meet the challenge. If you stop and really think about it, what kind of a man it takes to bear up under those circumstances, you'll have to admit or, at least, I'll have to admit that he's a better man than I am. And that in its respect over the centuries, Marcus Aurelius serves as a standing reproach to our self-indulgence, a standing reproach to the idea that we're unable to deal with the circumstances of human life. If you can deal with temptation at that level, I cannot imagine what is outside of human potential. And for the stoics, we must remember that any virtue which is accessible to all human being is in principle accessible to all of us. We all have a rational nature that allows us to control our feelings, our behavior, and our connection to other people. Compared to Marcus Aurelius, we have tiny little temptations: we're tempted to steal a little thing, we're tempted to cheat on our income taxes, we're tempted to cheat on our spouses... *Marcus Aurelius has that sort of temptation magnified by thousandfold! And he consistently does good stuff!* Stop and think about this for a minute. This is not a common man. This is not like the rest of us, and I don't know how he did it. Maybe he did it through philosophy but... Well, it remains to be seen. Marcus is the last of the good emperors, the last of the Antonine emperors. All of the emperors that come before him are, generally speaking, ok, but not as bad as the ones that come after. But Marcus is, perhaps, the greatest and the noblest of the Romans. When old-fashioned writers write about virtue, what they have in mind is Marcus Aurelius, a man who does what he ought to do regardless of circumstances - tough Roman virtue. He's not afraid of being dead. He's not afraid of being in pain. He's not afraid of people laughing at him. He's only afraid of doing what's wrong. He's only afraid of doing chaos of his soul. Why? Because his soul is the only thing he's completely in control of. It's the only thing he's responsible for, and the rest of it is a matter of indifference to him. He's certainly going to try and perform his function as Emperor in the best way he possibly can. 

If there are Germans at his border, and should they succeed in winning this war, he did the best he could - he has no reason to feel guilty. If for some reason he gets sick, well, sickness is a part of human life: you accept it as it is, you deal with it the best you can, and then you move on. In other words, Marcus Aurelius tries to live a life in which he will not have to feel guilty about anything. And he succeeded in doing that under the most trying possible circumstances. Again, put yourself in a position where you can have anything you want, and no one can stop you. No matter how evil, no matter how depraved, no one can stop you because your word is the law. Marcus Aurelius behaved himself for 19 years under those circumstances. It's a standing reproach to our self-indulgence. 

The kind of things that Marcus Aurelius writes about is not meant for publication. Let's think about this a little further. Marcus wrote this manuscript, not intending to be published. After his death, he wanted to have it burned. Some philosophically inclined, I guess, bookkeeper, a librarian said, "No, we just can't throw this out. We cannot lose the memory of such a great man. And we can't lose the sort of meditations that he created." He wrote a book called Meditations, and it's a book to himself that's not intended to be published. What sort of a man writes a book to himself? What sense does it make? Think about it: the nature of the book is communicating something, and we think that we would want to communicate to some readers, but this is not going to be published. It's written to himself. What makes a man write a book to himself? I believe there's a very deep answer right here. Marcus Aurelius writes a book to himself because he's the loneliest man in the world. *He has no friends because he has no equals.* Think of a man breaking himself on the rock of an impossible virtue. He has no equals. Everyone he talks to wants something from him. He's the emperor of everything in the world. He owns it all. Everything he says immediately gets done. He has absolute life-and-death power over everyone, so any time he's in the throne room, he's having an audience, someone comes from the other end of Empire, and they always have some reason and they're always here because they want something from him, and all that Marcus wants is to live a philosophical life. But he happens to had the misfortune to be born an emperor of Rome. What a pity! So he has to deal with these self-centered, swine-ish people all the time, and it is a responsibility to do good for them: to give them justice, to give them both examples of virtue, and virtuous laws and virtuous decisions, and the weariness of it gets to him after a while. 

The book that he's written is shot through with a kind of philosophical melancholy that is extremely moving despite the stoic content of what he's saying. In other words, oddly enough, there are very few books in the world that generate more pathos, which creates more of a sense of pity for a person reading it than this book. He's writing a book for himself because he has no one to talk to. And what kind of things does he write in a book? Moral maxims. He has 2-3 ideas in a hundred odd pages, and he says essentially the same things again and again and again. Why? He has no one to talk to, so it limits the scope of his conversations and he's constantly trying to remind himself that, "Look. Although people you're dealing with are corrupt, evil, and depraved, it's your job not to get angry with them, but to try to teach them and morally improve them. If you can't morally improve them, at least put up with them, because the gods have created us, social animals. And it is the mark of the philosophical man that he should return the benefits for harm because those that would harm other people do not live the philosophical life. Those who do not want the ultimate good for themselves and for society do so because they don't know any better." Marcus has not only political power but wisdom, and in that respect, he's the only example in the Western tradition of any ruler who even approximates Plato's philosopher-king. He has some of the qualities that Plato himself thought the philosopher-king would have. He is totally disdainful of wealth. Why?! He owns everything! What would it be like to own everything from England to Egypt? Well, the idea of accumulating more stuff becomes less and less interesting if you think about it. If you can have sex with, say, a million people, the million, at first, has very limited attraction. At that point, he stopped to think, and he says, "I will do my best to constantly do what I ought to do." And there is a sort of whistling in the graveyard tone to this book. He is, in some respects, an enormously lonely man, and in some respects, an enormously sad man as melancholy in this book that's terrifically moving. 

And yet, we ought not to pity Marcus Aurelius, because if he looked at our lives, he would pity us. Pathetic creatures that we are, we don't even meet his standard of virtue, and we're pitying him? Think about the irony here. He said, "Well, I'd pity you back if I didn't think that was disrespectful." Think about what it takes to be something like Marcus Aurelis. We shall not see anyone like him again. In the book itself, he has all kinds of intriguing, and caustic moral maxims. He says things like this: "Soon, you will have forgotten all things, and soon, all things will have forgotten you." In other words, don't get overwrought. You're angry with this guy just because he didn't do what he was supposed to do. Ask yourself, how many people that are working for you are doing what they're supposed to do. Soon, you'll have forgotten all of this cause you'll be dead. And soon, all people that know you are going to be dead, too, and they'll have forgotten you. And so, what's the point of being mean to people? Now, imagine the kind of philosophical self-restraint we're talking about here. This is a guy who could chop everyone's head off if he gets sufficiently angry! So he never does! Remarkable, remarkable. So, Marcus Aurelius is a man who constantly in his book is writing short one- or two-line epigrams that essentially say things like: "Don't lose temper with these people, Marcus, you know how they are", "You tried to teach them and you can keep on trying to teach them, but if Socrates was a good man and they killed him, what do you expect them to do to you?" On the other hand, Marcus Aurelius is willing to rule the Roman Empire for the same reason as the platonic philosopher-king is: if he gives up, somebody worse is going to take the job, and you know what happens then, right? He would much rather just go home and read his books - he doesn't wanna listen to this stuff, but he says: "Well, the gods put me here. I didn't ask for this job and I can't very well give it up - I'd be abdicating my responsibility to other people. Imagine the bad lords and the bad emperors we're going to get after me! Or, should I give up the job now or stand here until the gods are good enough to relieve me of my post?" In fact, that's the metaphor he uses all the time. "The gods have put you on guard over the Roman Empire; everyone else is sleeping. Stay where you are, stay awake, elsewise God knows what's going to happen." Marcus Aurelius is constantly whistling his way through the graveyard trying to tell him that this is a very happy life, and he loves being a philosopher, particularly loves the portion of reality the gods assigned to him. 

Now, I think that everyone believes, except the people that read this book which, perhaps, is why it wasn't supposed to be published, that Marcus is a terrifically lonely man, a man of immense moral heroism who has no shoulder to cry on, who disdains to cry because what's the point of crying? - we must live in accordance with nature. Look, here's a natural condition of human beings: they get born, some stuff happens to them, and they die. Marcus's maxims, which reference that, are: stop complaining - there's nothing to complain about because there are two kinds of things, the ones you can control and the ones you can't. If you can't control it, then complaining about it is stupid and a waste of time and I don't wanna hear anymore about it! If you can't control it, so what's the point of talking about this? Or, you have the other kind of things - the ones you can control, like your intentions, like your behavior, like your actions. And since you can control them, who do you expect to help you out except yourself?! Stop complaining about that, too! So, whether it's the kind of thing you can control or it's the kind of thing you can't, Marcus Aurelius does not want to hear any complaints, and he does not want to hear any excuses because there are no excuses to give. 

Now, that's easy enough to say, and a lot of people think that other people should be this way, right? Notice, you can't help but admire this guy. For sure, everyone in this room thought: "Wow, what a guy! I wish I knew him personally." No, you don't. Think of what he would think of you. You really don't want to know this. Imagine working for him. Oh, please, no, this guy is never going to be satisfied, and if he is satisfied, it's not like he's going to give you an applause. He's going to say: "You're doing what you ought to do." No compliments - you're doing what you ought to do. You don't need any reward beyond that. You're living like a philosophical man, which is the reward itself. Virtue is its own reward; you're virtuous, what do you want from me? Go back to work! And if you're now virtuous, you are pretty much what he expects you to be, you swine. And what's unnerving about this is there's not the slightest taint of hypocrisy in it. He not only says this stuff, he acts this stuff. He not only talks the talk - he walks the walk! He does it! And he does it under worse, more difficult circumstances than you failed to do. And yet, he still likes us. He still goes out of his way to help us out. If he were the judge in the court of law, he would give us justice even though we have done nothing to deserve it. As a matter of fact, as Shakespeare put it in Hamlet: "If we gave every man his deserts, who would escape a whipping?" Marcus Aurelius would. That's part of a problem with Marcus Aurelius. There's nothing quite like this guy in the whole history of the world. In his book, Marcus Aurelius says things like, "Human beings are social animals. Either teach them or put up with them." The kind of thing that a man has to remind himself, I imagine. Or Marcus is in another passage, "Are you weary of enduring the bad man of the world? The Gods aren't and they made them. Are you really weary of enduring the bad man of the world especially given that you're one of them?" Dreadful, powerful, caustic, ruthless analysis of himself and others. He pulls no punches. He is an honest man, and how many honest politicians are there in the world? It's been some time since we had one leave us his literary remains and here we certainly do have one. 

The Stoics put together an important and, I think, worthwhile idea in this day of international politics, and that's the idea of a cosmopolitan political philosophy. There are few people as cosmopolitan, as lacking in provincial qualities as Marcus Aurelius. The stoic, wise man has made his life consistent with nature, and nature is universal: it exists in every place, in every time. So, the stoic man is never any place but home. He is the cosmos, that is what makes him cosmo-politan. In ancient Greek political theory, you were a citizen of one political polis, of one particular polis, one particular city-state: you were either an Athenian or you were Spartan. The stoic, wise man is cosmopolitan; wherever he lives, he lives in accordance with nature. Whatever he does, he does what he knows to be right. What difference does it make whether he's in a jail cell or in a palace? As Marcus Aurelius put it in a beautiful epigram in the book, "Even in a palace, it is possible to live well." No excuses. Don't tell me that it's because of temptation - we won't go over that. No excuses. The idea of a cosmopolitan political philosophy is one of the great achievements of Roman Stoicism, and if you stop and think about it, it's an excellent and necessary idea when you're running something as big and heterogeneous as the Roman Empire. This tremendously complicated mix of religions, and cultures, and peoples, and all kinds of heterogeneous ideas means that this is gonna be a big patchwork, a big quilt; it's not going to be one culturally unified area, but Marcus would be just as happy being a slave as he is being an emperor. He would have been just as happy being a Gaul or an Egyptian as a Roman as long as there's nature there and there's a human spirit, which can be made in accordance with nature. Any of the external facts of life don't matter. 

And now is the first time we can, perhaps, see why the Roman Stoics have a reputation, to some extent deserved, of being kind of harsh, cold, unfeeling men: there's nothing to worry about, and it's hard to sympathize with the fact that other people are worried about things that they regard as trivial or not worth worrying about at all. Many of us worry about sickness. Well, Marcus Aurelius will point out that all people get sick. Once you get sick, since you're a rational human being, you want to go to the doctor, do whatever he prescribes, and fix your body. There's no point in complaining anyplace along the line because you know what you're supposed to do - go do it! Stop asking for somebody else to help you. If you don't help yourself, how can you expect anybody else to help you? - which is a fair criticism. It would be much less persuasive and much less impressive if this would a sort of hypocritical philosophy where Marcus Aurelius indulged himself and told everybody else to be stoical. What really makes this spring to live, what makes persuasive and moving and important is that he lives this life. So, he doesn't complain when he gets sick; he doesn't complain when he meets military reverses; he doesn't complain about anything. Who would he complain to? If you think of the chain of command of the Roman Empire, he doesn't complain to anybody - everyone complains to him, and he constantly listens to that and to people's difficulties and problems. He's watching people become unglued and greedy and avaricious and swine-ish and lustful and all of the things he's not. So, he is rather harsh in his criticism, and I think it's a fair observation about him. But he's not hypocritical and he's not unfair. That's one of the cosmopolitan universal elements in this political philosophy. In it, the moral and political philosophy families are going to be connected in the same way that in Plato's Republic politics was "ethics writ large" and what was good for the individual soul - gold, silver, and bronze - that ordering of the would between reason, spirit, and desire. What's good for a soul is the same that is good for a city. We have rational people running the government like Marcus Aurelius, doing their best, following philosophical life. You'll want bravery and fortitude and courage among your soldiers - silver virtues, and among the rest of people you expect the bronze virtues - they want to eat, and drink, and make merry. It would be nice if we could make philosophers of all of them, but if we can't, well, the best thing we can do is to take care of them, prevent misfortunes befalling on them; in some respects, to try and save them from themselves. 

Now, Marcus Aurelius is the only example of this in Roman culture. There's not a lot of things that we can compare him to. If we had to say that there was someone to compare him to, that would be Epictetus, the slave, and Epictetus and Marcus Aurelius could meet at the level of equality even though the social distinctions between them are enormous and grave. The reason why they would meet at a level of equality because they could share mutual respect, they both understand that having an orderly soul is the key thing in human life, and that's what makes life worth living. Whether you happened to be a slave or an emperor doesn't make any difference. Whether you happened to be sick or healthy doesn't make any difference. Whether you happened to be just born and have a hundred years ahead of you or you're on your deathbed doesn't make any difference. Marcus says with regard to death (because many people are afraid of death) that he has no understanding of it; he doesn't really know what everybody else's problem is. He says, "Look, everyone dies, so you're going to die. Thus, what's the point of complaining about it? I can understand trying to avoid it, I mean, health is a good thing, but when you're going to die, you're going to die. Don't give in to fear. Don't give in to irrational musings. Don't let your imagination run wild. Control your feelings, control your emotions, control that part of you that is you; your meat - your body - not so important. The other stuff around you in the world is a matter of indifference to you. As long as you follow the way of nature, as long as you act in a rational fashion, as long as you live up to the best potentials of the human souls, then you are a good man and you need to worry about nothing else." 

Some people worry about gods - that the gods will cause you misfortunes; that the gods have Hades or hell or an afterlife, where people will be tortured or have bad things happen to them. Marcus adopts exactly the same position as Socrates did. He says, "I'm not certain that there are gods," - in the book itself he says that he's not aware of any rational proof that there exist gods, and of any rational proof that there aren't - he's agnostic in that respect, and he says, "Look, let's think about what the implications are if gods exist and if they don't, and let's see if we can find one way of acting that will satisfy both contingencies," - logical guy! He says, "If the gods don't exist, and the world is just atoms and the void, and there is no moral order to the world, well, then what difference does it make what happens to you or anybody else? You come into being and you go out of being, so what? You get healthy, you get sick, so what? There's nothing to get excited about because it's just atoms in the void. Don't be afraid of it; it is what it is, and there's nothing to be afraid of." You could say that Roman Stoicism is a way of telling people that there's nothing to be afraid of - nothing can happen to you in nature that is not a part of nature. And nature contains nothing fearful for the rational soul. 

Now, let's consider the proposition that there are gods or a god (it doesn't matter if you're monotheistic or polytheistic). If there are gods, then they must be rather gods of Socrates, they're all good; they're all wise; they're all completely moral and completely virtuous and completely knowing and completely excellent. With creatures like these, does anything bad happen to you? Well, maybe it would, maybe there is something actually in store for you later on; maybe there is Hades. Gods like that may want to create a moral order in the world and dish out to the bad people of the world just what they had coming to them. But suppose, hypothetically, you lived according to reason, and according to nature, and according to the universal law of the logos, would the gods hurt a man like that, or would a man like that would be a friend of the gods? In that case, the gods will do you no harm. So there are 2 possibilities: either the world is atoms and the void, in which case there's nothing to be afraid of because you're just a part of the world and you might as well go along with the flow. Relax! Enjoy the ride! Nothing to be scared of. Nothing to be excited about. On the other hand (and this, I suspect, deep down in Marcus what he really believes - just read between the lines), if the gods exist and they create moral order, and they are perfectly moral themselves, and they are perfectly just and good and righteous themselves, they will do you no harm. So if there's an afterlife, and you behave well, the gods will do you no harm because you deserve no harm done to you. If there is an afterlife, and you behave badly, you have no one to blame but yourself. In every case, the only thing that a man is in control of is the individual ego - himself, the cogito (what they later on called a cogito - the self). If you are in control of that, if you have an orderly soul, then you have a divine soul, a good soul, and your life is worth living. The gods will not penalize you for that. So, what is it to worry about? Don't worry, be happy. Either the world is atoms and the void - nothing to worry about, and if the gods are there - they're are certainly not going to hurt you. Either way, don't worry, be happy; do what you ought to do; meet your moral obligations. 

The single-minded pursuit of rationality, of justice, of temperance, of fortitude, is what this book is all about. And in some respects, I feel a little bit like a voyeur and opening up a manuscript that Marcus never meant to publish, and doubtless, he would be nothing except embarrassed if he knew that people were reading this book because he wouldn't want to show that crack in the stoic face. He doesn't want to give people the idea that he ever worries or ever gets upset at all. In other words, doubtless, if he's in heaven, he regrets every line he ever wrote. Not because he doesn't think it might benefit us, but because it shows the sort of weakness not entirely consistent with Stoic virtue. Perhaps, there are other Stoics who suffered more pain, who had greater difficulties and never wrote a line. In Marcus Aurelius's view, those men would be greater than he. And whether there exist such people or not, Marcus Aurelius is a sort of standing reproach to our weakness, to our self-indulgence, to our willingness to give in to what we want, to our inclination to make excuses about things that were entirely up to us and to try and act as if we're not responsible for our behavior. What I want to say is that Marcus Aurelius is an important step in the construction of the Western conception of the self or the ego. You are the part of you; the will, the soul, the internal stuff - that's what you're responsible for, that's what the gods will judge you on the basis of. Apart from that, don't worry about it - all other matters are of indifference to you. Connect yourself to nature, do what's right, and let the devil take the hindmost - it's not your problem. 

Stoicism is an appropriate philosophy, I would say, for serious, ruthless, introspective people that want real answers and are willing to take no nonsense. If I were to teach people that are going to be in terrible danger and terrible, fearful conditions, I would teach them to do what they know they ought to do and to discipline and organize their emotions in such a way that is not disgraceful. To avoid that is the epitome of the Stoic virtue, and it may not have all the attractive elements of Socratic philosophy - it lacks the poetic element of Platonism, and it lacks the comprehensive intellectual drive of Socrates, but it still contains elements of Socratic nobility that neither Skepticism nor Epicureanism offer us. In that respect, I think, it's the true air of Socratic philosophy. 

The key idea behind Marcus Aurelius is something like this. It's just a human condition for us to have troubles and worries and anxiety and problems. Don't torture yourself by worrying about things that are not in your control - leave that in the hands of God, in the hands of nature. Do your best to control the things that you do have control over - yourself, your behavior, your intentions, and your actions. If you do that, you will live a blessed and happy and virtuous and wise life. You will be a real human being. If you fail to do that, gradually the inclination towards debauchery, evil, vice, sin, to put it in theological terms, will become greater and greater, and unless you arrest this slide towards self-indulgence, you will harm yourself and people around you. No rational being wishes to harm themselves, and no rational being wishes to harm people around them. Because of that, if we were to be rational, it is the same thing as making us good, and it is the same thing as making us free. Not free in a sense of political freedom: being a slave or a free man, but free in a sense of being autonomous, making our own decisions, making laws for ourselves. Free in a sense no longer being a slave for our passions, being pushed about by our feelings, being a toy that gets messed with by arbitrary things that are really beneath the human condition and are mere emotions. If you want to be fully human, you must be fully free, and that means fully rational, and that means fully good. "Accept no substitutes," is what Marcus Aurelius says. He did that himself, and he hopes that other people will do it. He did the best he could. 

You can't help but feel that at the end of his life, he must have felt relieved of that terrible, crushing burden of his loneliness - a man that has no equals and has no friends, a man that has nothing but a philosophy to guide him. Death must have been a great release. It's like getting the evening off after putting your term guarding the camp. And instead of becoming an obscure and unimportant figure, he's become a symbol in the history of Western philosophy of the practical, concrete, immediate virtues - the sort of virtues that are accessible to us not because we have the profound intellectual ability, not because we are Newton or Kant, but simply because we have problems and we're everyday rational human beings. The Stoic man says that a virtue that is possible for one man is accessible to all of us. There is no excuse for us for not being that good. If we provide such excuses for ourselves, we harm ourselves, and we harm others by preventing us from recognizing our true moral obligations. Marcus Aurelius lets us know that all people suffer, but that not all people pity themselves. Marcus Aurelius lets us know that all men die but that not all men die whining. Something to think about. Take it home and mull it over.

---
## Tags
#theme/lecture #theme/philosophy #theme/stoicism #theme/thick-skin

---
## References
* [Marcus Aurelius - Lecture on Stoicism (Full Lecture) - YouTube](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=L5_an6B3H4E&ab_channel=JulesPodcast)